Title: The passing of the phantoms
        A study of evolutionary psychology and morals

Author: Charles Joseph Patten

Release date: November 6, 2025 [eBook #77186]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: E. P. Dutton & Company, 1925

Credits: Produced by Donald Cummings and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library).


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PASSING OF THE PHANTOMS ***




                      THE PASSING OF THE PHANTOMS




                          OTHER VOLUMES IN THE
                      TO-DAY AND TO-MORROW SERIES


  DAEDALUS, OR SCIENCE AND THE FUTURE
                                                    By J. B. S. Haldane

  ICARUS, OR THE FUTURE OF SCIENCE
                                            By Bertrand Russell, F.R.S.

  THE MONGOL IN OUR MIDST
                                              By F. G. Crookshank, M.D.
      New Light on Man and the Great Apes
        _Fully Illustrated_

  WIRELESS POSSIBILITIES
                                                     By Prof. A. M. Low
      Wireless in war, crime, business and
        pleasure. _With 4 Diagrams_

  TANTALUS, OR THE FUTURE OF MAN
                                                   By F. C. S. Schiller
      Man has still the primitive animal passions.
        He will destroy himself unless....

  NARCISSUS, AN ANATOMY OF CLOTHES
                                          By Gerald Heard. _Illustrated_

  CALLINICUS, A DEFENCE OF CHEMICAL WARFARE
                                                    By J. B. S. Haldane

  LYSISTRATA, OR WOMAN AND THE FUTURE
                                                 By Anthony M. Ludovici

  PERSEUS, OR OF DRAGONS
                                            By H. F. Scott Stokes, M.A.


                         E. P. DUTTON & COMPANY




                           THE PASSING OF THE
                                PHANTOMS

                        A STUDY OF EVOLUTIONARY
                         PSYCHOLOGY AND MORALS

                                   BY

               C. J. PATTEN, M.A., M.D., Sc.D., F.R.A.I.

              _Professor of Anatomy, Sheffield University,
                       Examiner in Anatomy in the
                    University of Wales, etc., etc._


                             [Illustration]


                                New York
                         E. P. DUTTON & COMPANY
                            681 Fifth Avenue




                            COPYRIGHT, 1925
                       By E. P. DUTTON & COMPANY

                         _All rights Reserved_


                         PRINTED IN THE UNITED
                           STATES OF AMERICA




                                   To
                              W. J. N. V.




                                PREFACE


In this little book the author recounts, first hand, a number of
instances--out of many more known to him--illustrating the evolution
of the mental and moral faculties in lower animals. Animal behaviour
is a study which at all times gives much pleasure and amusement; but
its supreme importance and interest is found in the fact that it places
in our hands the master-key which unlocks the secrets regarding the
Evolution of Human Morality.

                                                       C. J. PATTEN.

_The University, Sheffield._




                          CONTENTS


 CHAPTER                                                PAGE

    I. THE REALITY OF EVOLUTION                            1

   II. EVIDENCES OF THE EVOLUTION OF MENTAL POWERS        31

  III. EVIDENCES OF THE EVOLUTION OF THE MORAL SENSE      53

   IV. THE EVOLUTION OF HUMAN MORALITY                    67




                           THE PASSING OF THE
                                PHANTOMS


                               CHAPTER I

                        THE REALITY OF EVOLUTION


The widening of the horizon of biological knowledge within recent years
has been remarkable and has cast a flood of light on the question of
‘Man’s Place in Nature.’ At the present day well-informed persons
have abandoned the idea of a ‘miraculous’ or special creation of man,
yet it is curious to note with what tenacity tradition adheres, and
how speculative theories and poetical imaginations to a large extent
still prejudice the mind to shut out pure reasoning and rational
philosophical thinking. While it has become very general now-a-days
to accept the idea of evolution as that method by which man came to
inhabit this planet, one still asks do most of us thoroughly grasp the
principles of the doctrine which we profess to accept? While many of
us do, still it would appear that there are others who vaguely accept
the doctrine because it is becoming more fashionable to do so every
day. That is to say man, a highly gregarious animal, is carried away to
follow the strong leaders of the flock. But to get a clear conception
of the wonders of organic descent one must insist that it is not enough
to listen only to lectures: we must be students of Nature, endowed
with a wholesome amount of scepticism, and not content ourselves with
accepting _en masse_ the evidence of others without verifying for
ourselves as far as we can the revelations made in the study of the
biological sciences.

I introduce these few sentences at the outset because I wish to
point out what a very strong attitude of mind in favour of the

[Sidenote: _Evolution a reality_]

reality of human evolution is fostered by those of us who have
had the opportunities of making a special study of biology, more
particularly when this includes a detailed knowledge of human anatomy
and embryology. But it might be asked: Why then do our medical brethren
who study anatomy in detail not act more fervently as propagandists of
the theme of evolution? As a matter of fact, I have seldom met with
a medical student who at the end of his anatomical course has not,
at least in an unprejudiced and general way, accepted evolutionary
principles; but, even if such fail to occupy a foremost place in
his mind, it is not surprising considering the strongly utilitarian
view he takes of the study in question. The medical student, and he
who teaches the subject of anatomy from this utilitarian standpoint
alone, obtain but a limited view of the great principles of human
structure. This is brought home to us at once by taking one or two
familiar examples. The medical student seldom stops to consider the
significance of the presence of the mammary gland in the male. To
him its presence is probably a matter of little import. But in the

[Sidenote: _Evidence of Evolution from vestigial Sex-organs_]

mind of the anatomist the question at once arises: Why is the organ
there at all, if it be useless? And he finds by further examination
in an early stage of the intra-uterine development of the individual
that the gland is already present when the external sex-organs are
indistinguishable, and when it would be impossible to say which sex
the individual would ultimately assume. The logical conclusion arrived
at, then, is that this gland is only suppressed, in one sex, so that
the male has incorporated in its body structural features, more fully
developed and functional in the female, a distinction merely of degree
but not of kind. _Vice versa_, an examination of the female generative
organs reveals to us the fact that the male homologues have not
vanished, but are merely suppressed. This short chain of reasoning from
objective biological evidence regarding the presence of structures
which can be examined without even resorting to dissection has a most
important bearing on the whole question of the evolution of sex from
an ancestral hermaphrodite stock. And, indeed, we find on comparing
our human embryo in certain very early stages with some lower forms
of life which are hermaphrodite, that a marked similarity can be
made out. The evolutionary history of the mammary glands is highly
interesting, and deserves short notice as shedding light on the reality
of evolution. Sir Arthur Keith in his delightful work _Human Embryology
and Morphology_ (4th ed., 1921) says that “it is a remarkable fact that
although the milk glands do not come into use until adult life, and
although they must be regarded as among the later evolved structures of
vertebrate animals, yet they are _the first of all the glands arising
from the epidermis to appear during development of the embryo_. In
the human embryo of the 6th week, or in the corresponding stage of a
pig or of any other mammal, the primary mammary ridge or milk line――a
mere surface thickening of the ectoderm――is seen extending along the
body wall on either side from axilla to groin. Breslau[1] regards
these primary ridges as representatives of the brooding organs of
the ancestors of mammals, from which structures he supposed that the
mammary glands were evolved. In a large number of human beings (15%)
one or more supernumerary nipples are to be found between the axilla
and the groin, indicating the wide distribution of ancestral glands.
The mammary ridge appears in both sexes alike, but this may not mean
that both sexes of ancestral mammals were concerned in brooding or
gave milk. The male is the father of girls as well as of boys; it is
therefore necessary to provide both father and mother with a complete
sexual outfit if each sex is to provide equal shares to the making
of their progeny. In females the breasts undergo a great development
at puberty while in males they retain their infantile form.” Many
other instances could easily be cited of the presence of structures
which afford us incontestable evidence of the evolution of the human
body from ancestors not necessarily of human form. Suffice it to
draw attention to certain muscles which in _Herbivores_ and other
Orders are well developed and functional but are only vestigial in
man, and to other muscles present in certain groups of lower animals,

[Sidenote: _Evidence of Evolution from atavistic myology_]

which, though long-since disappeared from the later human ancestry,
nevertheless occasionally, by the strong strain of heredity, make their
appearance again in human beings of the present day. The study of Human
Embryology is most convincing, and carries with it incontrovertible
proofs of evolution. We find that it is only at the later stages of
development within the uterus that the human being is recognizable
as such, when it is known as a foetus. In common with other higher
animals, man _in utero_ repeats the stages of his ancestral-tree from
the very lowest to the highest forms of animal life, due allowance

[Sidenote: _Evidences of Evolution from Human Ontogeny_]

being made for a blurred and transient picture owing to adaptative
modifications which have arisen during countless ages and are purely
secondary in character. Nor can it be argued that the process by which
development proceeds is simply a mechanical one, built on a uniform
plan or design of Nature. For, if it were, to take a simple example
out of hundreds, one might ask why, just at the termination of foetal
life, the digits of the limb are so specialized in different mammals?
All arise alike; but compare the hoof of the horse, the flipper of
the seal, the functionless and atrophied thumb of most quadrupeds, and
so on, with the hand of man. There is no moulding within the uterus to
produce these patterns mechanically. We are led to consider that, while
we inherit through our non-human ancestors many features (more or less
portrayed in our living non-human cousins), we also have had impressed
upon us, demonstrable only at the termination of our embryological
career, the features of our immediate predecessors, namely our own
parents, and these features hall-mark us as the individual proper to
which we belong, that is to say into which we have evolved. Even these
few instances which I have cited regarding the study of human structure
will, I think, suffice to remind us how intimately bound up become
the thoughts of the anatomist with the evolution of his own body.
Material for investigation is before him daily, and he cannot――even
though he wished it――get away from the fact which may be expressed in
Darwin’s words: “Man still bears in his bodily frame the indelible
stamp of his lowly origin.” But here no thoughtful anatomist can stop.

[Sidenote: _Mental Evolution_]

With the material for the study of the development of the Brain in
front of him, from the extremely simple membranous tubular condition
of that organ to the adult form, when the scheme of its complexity
seems an almost hopeless task to unravel; with the application of his
knowledge of function supplementary to his knowledge of structure, he
is carried onward ever more and more to consider as far as he can push
his biological data, the physical basis of mental manifestations which
go to form the phenomena grouped under habits, out of which the conduct
or ethical aspect of the individual, relative to his fellow-creature,
springs. As the processes of mental development are very imperfectly

[Sidenote: _Outline of the Evolution of the Human Brain_]

realized, I may here indicate very briefly the outlines along which
the Brain develops, pointing out at the same time its correlation
during phases of its development with the permanent, that is, the
adult condition of the brains in several other animals. The expression
‘thin-skinned,’ often applied to persons who might be judged as
mentally over sensitive, is not inappropriate when we bear in mind that

[Sidenote: _Brain and Skin_]

the Brain and Spinal cord, in fact the whole nervous system, originates
from the skin-layer of the embryo; and, indeed, in the lower forms of
Invertebrate animals the beginning of a nervous system is diffused
over the skin-layer, in which are found indications of sensation. In
such forms, for instance as the jelly-fishes, the brain-skin layer does
not differentiate or split off into its two component parts; but in
higher forms we find development proceeding in this wise; an elongated
groove appears on the surface of a circumscribed area of an oval-shaped
vesicle. The area is known as the embryonic shield, because it is on
it that the embryo is afterwards laid down. But when the groove first
appears there is, so to speak, but little else of an embryo, except
that part which is now differentiating itself into the form of this
groove. In other words, a very early indication of the appearance of
the embryo is represented by its groove-shaped nervous system. But to
continue. The surface-groove is soon converted into a simple straight
tube, which, seeking a deeper situation, becomes surrounded by other
tissue and cut off from the general surface-layer. Its wall then is
extremely thin, comparable to a very fine membranous film, and the
cellular elements of which it is composed are comparatively simple in
shape, such as are found in many other parts of the permanent body.

[Sidenote: _Vesicular stage of the Human Brain_]

Very rapidly, however, the front portion of the tube dilates into
three bulbs which are separated only by surface constrictions, so that
their spacious cavities are continuous. These bulbs or vesicles are,
in fact, the whole of the primitive Human Brain, out of which all
other subdivisions of the organ are derived. Microscopical examination
reveals to us here, and also in the lower portion of the tube (the
latter forming the spinal cord), very thin membranous walls. However,
with high magnifications of the microscope, the cellular elements
are seen to be evolving speedily from simple to more complicated
shapes. They give out branching processes which minutely interlace
with those of neighbouring cells. These cells become very complicated
in the ultimate analysis of their minute protoplasmic structure
before the wall of the brain undergoes much thickening. They serve
the purposes of allowing stimuli to pass from one cell to another,
which, shooting along the innumerable branchings, can set up changes
in the cellular elements, sometimes over a considerable area of the
Brain. However, as long as the wall remains thin the cell-machinery
remains, comparatively speaking, very limited in its action. In the
lower forms of fishes, whose brains developmentally correspond more or
less with the conditions of the early Human Brain, the higher mental
manifestations, such as _memory_, _thought_, and so on, are feebly, if
at all, capable of being called forth. If we now examine the fore-brain
of a Human Foetus somewhat advanced, say at the stage when the organ
is structurally comparable to the brain of an adult rabbit, we find
that the walls have greatly thickened, giving the organ the appearance
of being solid with a small hollow core. A very thin section of this
wall shows vast numbers of complicated branching cells――what myriads,
therefore, can the entire thickness of the wall accommodate! A step
further and we behold in the Brain of the new-born babe a highly
elaborate organ with immensely thickened walls stocked with cells which
form the psychic machinery, and too intricate in their structure to
call for special description here. And while now, from the structural
point of view, we may regard the Human Brain as almost completed in
its marvellous complexity, we are nevertheless struck with the great
hiatus existing between the mental powers in parent and babe. It is
true that many faculties of the Brain (which we would have as abstract
in nature) manifest themselves at an extraordinarily early period,
and that they seem to be the results of past experiences of the Human

[Sidenote: _The Brain of the babe and the Evolution of Mental
Faculties_]

Race, which, having accrued, have been passed on by heredity to the
offspring; yet others, and even the same faculties under different
conditions, are put into action by experiences founded mainly on
the child’s own observations and experiments. Regarding experiences
inherited, Herbert Spencer points out that “an infant in arms, when
old enough to gaze at objects around with some vague recognition,
smiles in response to the laughing face and soft caressing voice of
its mother. Let there come someone who, with an angry face, speaks to
it in harsh tones. The smile disappears, the features contract into an
expression of pain, and, beginning to cry, it turns away its head, and
makes such movements of escape as are possible. What is the meaning of
these facts? Why does not the frown make it smile, and the mother’s
laugh make it weep? There is but one answer. Already in its developing
brain there is coming into play the structure through which one cluster
of visual and auditory impressions excites pleasurable feelings, and
the structure through which another cluster of visual and auditory
impressions excites painful feelings. The infant knows no more about
the relation existing between a ferocious expression of face, and the
evils which may follow perception of it, than the young bird just out
of its nest knows of the possible pain and death which may be inflicted
by a man coming towards it; and as certainly, in the one case as in
the other, the alarm felt is due to a partially established nervous

[Sidenote: _Inherited Experiences of mental manifestations_]

structure. Why does this partially established nervous structure
betray its presence thus early in the human being? Simply because in
the past experiences of the human race smiles and gentle tones in
those around have been the habitual accompaniments of pleasurable
feelings; while pains of many kinds, immediate and more or less remote,
have been continually associated with the impressions received from
knit brows, and set teeth, and grating voice. Much deeper down than
the history of the human race must we go to find the beginnings of
these connections. The appearances and sounds which excite in the
infant a vague dread indicate danger; and do so because they are the
physiological accompaniments of destructive action, some of them common
to man and inferior mammals, and consequently understood by inferior
mammals as every puppy shows us. What we call the natural language of
anger is due to a partial contraction of those muscles which actual
combat would call into play; and all marks of irritation down to
that passing shade over the brow which accompanies slight annoyance
are incipient stages of these same contractions. Conversely with the
natural language of pleasure, and of that state of mind which we call

[Sidenote: _Physiological interpretation of Anger and Pleasure_]

amicable feeling this too, has a physiological interpretation.” Let us
now examine the same faculties, viz. _sorrow_ and _joy_ under different
conditions, and see how the Brain machinery is called forth into
action. The child trips over the door-mat and falls in its eagerness
to reach the sweetmeat held up in the parent’s hand at the other end
of the room. The fall occasions pain, but only in a slight degree,
not sufficient to warrant the burst of screams and sobs which follow.
The experiment is repeated, and the child comes down again, this time
more easily still, but the cries become worse and more prolonged.
And, if the experiment is again repeated and the child falls, its
sorrow instead of abating seems to increase. Why is this? It seems
contrary to the more familiar cases of children who, after several
upsets of an easy kind, i.e. involving little or no pain, become used
to the mishap and get up smiling. But the particular child of whom we
speak has made an important observation as it treads its ways hastily
across the floor, and as it falls it continues in piteous sobs, to

[Sidenote: _The unfolding of the mental Faculties of Sorrow and Joy_]

observe――what? _the sweetmeat_. And it is in the great disappointment
involved in the loss of time in securing the coveted tit-bit, coupled
with sensation of pain, here only slightly felt but no doubt involving
an unpleasant inherited sensation, that such an outburst of the
mental manifestation――_Sorrow_――is now unfolded. In a short time the
child tries the experiment of raising his feet higher in passing over
the door-mat, and now, finding that in so doing he no longer comes
tumbling down and consequently can scamper across the room without
interruption to obtain the sweet, the mental manifestation of――_Joy_ is
more and more unfolded and the outbursts of laughter, as the experiment
is repeated, become more marked. And further, regarding this part of
the subject, it may be said that while there is reason to believe that
the basis of Memory is to a large extent the outcome of inherited
experiences, still it undergoes rapid expansion as the child proceeds
to build up its own vocabulary by associating sounds with ideas, and by
showing a most earnest desire to reproduce those sounds as seen in the
impatient and imperfect way in which they are blurted out, the parent
often being at a loss to know what they mean.

[1] _The Mammary Apparatus of the Mammalia_, with Introduction by Prof.
J. P. Hill, London, 1920.

I need dwell no further on the support of the truths of Evolution: it
is clear that physically and mentally we undergo a gradual process
of development from the simple to the complex organism. The evidences
to be derived from the living forms of animal life around us need not
here detain us. Let us just bear in mind that none of those now living

[Sidenote: _Phylogeny or Stem-Evolution_]

could closely represent in form our ancestors, as it is sometimes
stated. Their kinship could only be that of a cousin: the ape a closer
cousin than the cat; the cat a closer cousin than the jelly-fish.
These creatures are in themselves modified from the common ancestral
stocks (vast numbers of which have long since become extinct), from

[Sidenote: _Cousinship with all living beings_]

which their cousinship has diverged. A study of ancestral stocks
would take us too far a-field in this treatise, so we must be content
to accept the statement that pre-natal evolution or the evolution
of one’s own being, and stem-evolution or evolution of the race are
closely intertwined. But since I have asked you to give your support
to Organic evolution, largely on the evidences derived from a study
of pre-natal development, one question will probably suggest itself,
namely, what is the nature of this extraordinary persistent force of
heredity which acts on the egg of a Human Being, which Human Being
has for thousands of years lost to a great extent his resemblance to
unhuman-like ancestors. The early stages of pre-natal development,
were these mechanical in nature, would be more easily understood,
because the embryos of many animals are then almost indistinguishable,
and might, so to speak, be cast in the same form of mould. But, with
regard to the later stages, where the mechanical notion is quite
impossible to entertain, we ask how does heredity act in evolving a
generalized fore-limbed-embryo into the special form of its parent?
It is true that aberrant types do arise, but these are so exceedingly
rare[2] that their occurrence does not seem to affect the question. We
ask if an embryo, say of a dog, is during its stages of development
recapitulating its genealogical tree, why is it not sometimes born
unlike a dog, and like some more or less remote vertebrate ancestor?
For, after all, when due reflection is made with regard to the
wonderful transformations in later embryonic existence which go on,
it is remarkable with what surety the offspring reaches the goal
and structurally is born an exact miniature of its parents. This
marvellous hereditary conservation which permits of _like begetting_

[Sidenote: _The Force of Heredity in Ontogeny_]

_like_ seems to depend upon _long-associated habits of the cellular
elements of the embryo itself_. This is made more clear when we
remember that, as Sir Francis Darwin[3] has put it, the characteristic
of habit is, _par excellence_, a capacity acquired by repetition of
reacting to a fraction of the original environment. Thus, when a
series of actions are compelled to follow each other by applying a
series of stimuli, the actions become organically tied together, or
associated, and follow each other automatically even when the whole
series of stimuli are not acting. And further light is thrown on the
subject when we take into consideration the fact that stimuli (here
represented by a series of stages of cell-division and growth, each
stage apparently serving as a stimulus to the next) are not momentary
in effect, but leave a trace of themselves on the organism constituting
thereby the physical basis of the phenomena grouped under _memory_ in

[Sidenote: _Physical basis of Memory_]

its widest sense. Indeed, there is reason to believe that _memory_
has its place in the morphological or structural as well as in the
temporary reactions of living things. And finally, with regard to the
memory-faculty in connection with the development of the Human Embryo
from its initial stage as a simple egg into the perfect organism,
in referring to the wonderful series of ancestor-like changes which
take place and which resemble those that arose in the long process of
stem-evolution, here Sir Francis Darwin draws a striking analogy in
saying: “This is precisely paralleled by our own experience of memory,
for it often happens that we cannot reproduce the last-learned verse of
the poem without repeating the earlier part: each verse is suggested
by the previous one and acts as a stimulus for the next. The blurred
and imperfect character of the ontogenetic version of the phylogenetic
series may at least remind us of the tendency to abbreviate by omission
what we have learnt by heart.” It is a matter of profound interest to

[Sidenote: _The Existence of Memory in plants_]

know that the basis of _memory_ by association exists in very low forms
of animal as well as in plant organisms. In the latter this factor
has been illustrated by the power of movement, which power, though
acting to stimuli, can be seen to take place in the absence of such.
That a simple form of associated action implies consciousness, as we
understand that phenomenon, is a point I am unable to enter upon; and
yet it is impossible to know whether or not plants or the simplest

[Sidenote: _Psychic element pervades organic Nature_]

forms of animal-life are conscious; “but it is consistent with the
doctrine of continuity that in all living things there is something
psychic, and, if we accept this point of view, we must believe that in
plants there exists a faint copy of what we know as consciousness in
ourselves” (Sir Francis Darwin).

[2] Such must be distinguished from the _monsters_ of medical science,
which include many forms of arrest of development, and plural fusions.
One genuine aberrant form of kitten has come under my notice, in which
the face was long and pointed and the eyes open at birth.

[3] _Presidential Address._ Brit. Assoc. Dublin, 1908.




                               CHAPTER II

              EVIDENCES OF THE EVOLUTION OF MENTAL POWERS


From what has been said in the foregoing pages it is evident that not
only our bodily equipment but also our mental manifestations――which
latter are often regarded as abstract, and merely concomitant with
changes in the brain-substance rather than physically the direct
outcome of such changes――these have a deeply rooted origin in the
remote beginnings of living things. Space has permitted me to approach
the faculty called _memory_ only from the developmental standpoint.
I have selected it because, while we have evidence to show that
_memory_ is not confined necessarily to the workings of the Brain
alone (the other cells of the ‘_soma_’ or body, participating in the
manifestations of this phenomenon), and therefore while its supposed
purely mental origin in embryonic existence may be considered as
incomplete, nevertheless the conscious mental workings of this
marvellous faculty after birth are of primary importance in connection
with the rise and advancement of morality. Subservient, and revolving,
so to speak, around Memory, as the plants round a solar system, are

[Sidenote: _Psycho-biological analysis of mental faculties_]

such emotions as _Joy_, _Sorrow_, _Fear_, _Anger_, _Love_, etc., and
some of these we have already touched upon from the developmental point
of view. Other expressions of mental activity of great importance
and complexity, such as _Curiosity_, _Imitation_, _Imagination_,
_Admiration_, etc., have also evolved, and their presence can be
traced far down the trunk of the ancestral tree. But the evidence
of their evolution must for the most part be assumed; for even a
comparison of these faculties with the same in man is a subject which
I cannot here touch upon, except in some of the cases which have come
under my personal notice. If the reader wishes to pursue this subject
further let him glean from the pages of Darwin’s _Descent of Man_, and
he will see, in the chapter on this theme, an array of marshalled facts
which leaves no room for doubt.

I will confine my attention to observations which I have made on the
powers of _Imitation_, _Attention_, _Imagination_, and _Admiration_
among some of the lower animals. My subjects have been pigeons, hawks,
dogs, cats, and horses, all of which except the last were at one time
or another my own particular pets. And I would add that in each case
the particular faculty in question has been strongly developed during
the animal’s tenure of captivity. I shall also recount a few more

[Sidenote: _Hawks: faculty of Attention_]

cursory observations on animals in Zoological Gardens. I have always
had a particular fancy for hawks. Attracted by their beauty of form,
bold, fearless, and honest expression of eye, their hardiness of nature
together with the rough and ready way in which, when one has gained
their confidence and love, they will exhibit affection, are points to
which I have paid much attention. I have kept a succession of hawks
ever since my boyhood, and have noticed on many occasions remarkable
instances of the development of a faculty which should be capable of
expansion in them, namely _Attention_. This I say because the brain of
a hawk may be well described as an _eye-brain_, the sense of sight
being developed altogether out of proportion to the other senses.
One of my Kestrels, which was a female, would attend so eagerly to a
sudden rush and bark of a little dog when near the cage that I could
lift up one foot, gently close the bird’s talons, and shake ‘hands.’
The reason of this concentrated attention was that the hawk associated
the sudden barking with the presence or possible approach of a black
cat which periodically came round and tried to purloin the meat, an
action usually checked in the nick of time by the canine custodian.
The bird loved music; a soothing lullaby, constantly repeated, would
call forth so marked contentment (as the bird gazed with steadfast
look into one’s face) that one could stroke her feathers, a proceeding
much objected to under ordinary mental conditions. A friend staying
on a visit, who has a passionate love for animals, took a great
fancy to my pet, and this was strongly reciprocated. One evening as
the bird stood on a table, she lent over her and in whispering tones
commenced a soft lullaby. So charmed, I might say almost mesmerized
became the listener that she took no notice of a miniature doctor’s
gown, of bright red and blue material being laid across her shoulders;
and it was not for several minutes afterwards, when she awoke from her
reverie at the cessation of the music, that she beheld her strange
guise, and then with a swift stroke of her claws pulled off the garb.

[Sidenote: _Hawks: faculty of Imagination_]

This hawk was strongly imaginative, as the following incident will
illustrate. On approaching her coop with a hard black felt hat on my
head, she never recognized me, and exhibited considerable dread of my
presence. I cannot say that I have quite discovered the reason, but it
would appear that she conjured up in her mind a vague mental picture
of something animate or otherwise which she had probably once upon a
time seen and which frightened her, and that she associated its form
with my harmless head-gear. The timidity can hardly be the outcome
of inherited experience, for no natural enemy that I know bears a
semblance to the rim of my hat, which I think is the part she feared

[Sidenote: _Fear associated with Imagination_]

most. Rooks and especially ravens often mob and drive away from the
cliff this species of Hawk, but I fear it would be far-fetched for
me to entertain the notion that my hat appeared as an effigy of one
of these swarthy combatants, especially as my bird never saw either
cliff or raven in its life. Indeed the _colour_ of my hat was not the
real cause of alarm, as is seen by the fact that a person dressed
entirely in black without the hat on, approaching instilled no fear.
And so, as an ultimate suggestion, I ask, _was the colour coupled with
the form of my hat_ conceived as resembling the feline lurker above
referred to?――and, if we admit this, we must allow for considerable
elasticity of the bird’s imaginative faculty. At all events, whatever
was her cause of fear, it seemed unwarranted, for I have never tried to
induce fright――in fact, when wearing the hat, I have sought to distract
attention by the offer of food; but this has been of no avail.

[Sidenote: _Pigeons: faculty of Attention_]

Most of us are aware that in pigeons both sexes take on the task of
incubation. But sometimes the female will leave her eggs for a short
period in order to obtain food, when she will return for another spell
on the nest before exchanging duties with her mate. When she is on the
ground, the male usually feeds for a short time with her; but, if she
delays too long, he hunts her back to the nest. Among my own pigeons I
have observed how a female which remained off her eggs too long, after
several offences drew the attention of her mate so markedly that, on
attempting to come off her eggs again he immediately flew after her
and, pecking at her vigorously, succeeded in sending her back at once
to her maternal duties――in fact he showed distinctly that he did not
intend to allow her to leave the nest until it was time for him to take
on his share of incubation.

[Sidenote: _Cat: faculty of imitating voice-sounds_]

Illustrative of the faculty of imitating voice-sounds I cite the
following: In a large male tabby-cat which showed great aptitude for
performing tricks I managed to develop a curious double call-note. I
incidentally noticed this strange sound, which the cat first made when
he had a severe throat affection. Unable to produce the usual prolonged
‘_mew_’ when about to receive his saucer of milk, he endeavoured to
show me his wants by two little ejaculations resembling the barks of
a puppy. During his illness he made these sounds at very frequent
intervals of the day, and it occurred to me that, if I gave him milk
each time he uttered them, he might associate this generosity on my
part with the abnormal sounds he produced. As the cough passed away,
and the normal prolonged single-syllabled ‘_mew_’ returned, I used to
hesitate before putting the saucer to the ground. At first there was
no response, but soon the bitter disappointment which seemed to enter
the feline mind at being refused its drink in response to many a
plaintive ‘_mew_’ seemed to awaken in his memory recent associations
of ideas suggestive of the repetition of the double note. The moment I
heard this I placed the saucer of milk on the floor and thus after some
difficulty I succeeded in developing a permanent double call-note in
this domestic pet. Here it would appear that the cat learned to retain
by imitation an abnormal sound which emanated from himself originally;
though I must have helped on the power of this faculty by my own
mimicry of the abnormal sound which I often repeated when bribing the
animal.

[Sidenote: _Dogs: faculty of Imagination_]

Imagination is highly developed in Dogs. Their intellect is so bright
and their disposition so sympathetic that it is an easy matter to
beguile them into the belief that harmless inanimate objects may
possess ‘evil spirits.’ One of my small dogs always stole away from
me with uncoiled lowered tail if I showed her a black bottle, and this
dread of the uncanny is simply due to the fact that the first time
I showed the bottle I uttered a few remarks in a grave tone similar
to those which I would adopt if she put her muddy paws on my coat or
committed a like trivial offence. This fear is hardly comparable to
that displayed when a dog is shown the whip, for in the latter case
the animal has probably been on many previous occasions severely hurt
by the actual use of the lash. If a few gravely uttered sentences once
made were sufficient to deter the animal from approaching a certain
object, why did the same animal jump on my lap repeatedly with muddy
paws when the bottle was not visible? In the latter action correction
had been more repeatedly and stringently enforced――indeed I have often
shown annoyance, as one naturally would, at one’s new clothes being
smeared with mud. The answer to the question seems obvious. The dog
had acquired a permanent love for her master: she longed for petting
and caresses. When she saw him sitting on a chair, she, on entering
the room, bounded on his lap, forgetful in her excitement of previous
corrections. But a black bottle was an object concerning which she was
absolutely indifferent to originally, and would have passed it by in
the street without further ado. When, therefore, she saw her master
(whom she was wont to revere with almost complete religious-like
submission) introducing her in grave warning tones to this curious
object, her imagination began to expand, and her original indifference,
passing through phases of suspicion or curiosity, became lengthened
out into a _permanent superstition_.

[Sidenote: _Dogs: belief in Spirits_]

Several dogs that I have kept have indulged in the habit of uttering a
melancholy whine during moon-light. I used to think that the light shed
from the moon itself was the direct cause of such utterances, but it
has been pointed out that, as dogs stare not at the moon but at some
fixed point on the horizon, their “imaginations may be disturbed by
the vague outlines of the surrounding objects, and conjure up before
them fantastic images: if this be so, their feelings may almost be
called superstitions.” Returning to observations made on a pug-dog,
I may add that she was fully sensible of _Admiration_; by decking
her out with a bright blue or scarlet ribbon tied in a big bow round
her neck, by praising her with pleasing tones and friendly pats
(especially in the presence of a circle of human admirers), she would
sit up and start a sort of chattering conversation, often in little
ejaculations of two or three syllables; then pause; and then start the

[Sidenote: _Dogs: faculty of Admiration_]

same again, this being kept up for some time. Increase of conversation,
especially when addressed to the animal, would encourage this action,
which was accompanied with the fullest amount of facial expression
possible――indeed a faint incipient smile appeared as the upper lip was
softly raised and retracted. This expression was quite distinct from
the raised lip seen during a snarl; for, in the latter case, the other
facial muscles of combat were brought into action. This chattering
sound to which I have just referred had evolved from a few short sharp
barks impatiently emitted when I neglected to throw bits of biscuit
after asking the dog to “beg.” And instead of always throwing the bits
at once, and thereby stopping the barks, I used to address the dog in
somewhat similar tones to its own, but I added to the syllables: by
repeating this on many occasions when giving food, I managed to call
forth response. Ultimately I could set the chattering going by warm
adulation alone.

[Sidenote: _Dogs: faculty of Mimicry_]

While dogs are highly imaginative, I do not think they possess much
faculty for mimicry; yet there are some remarkable instances, cited
by observers of repute, illustrating to what a remarkable degree this
can be brought out. The instance which I have given regarding the
chattering, and which has been developed partially along the lines of
mimicry, is all I can recount in the case of dogs. But, curiously
enough, many instances are cited of dogs (which have been reared by
cats) licking their own paws and then rubbing their faces and ears
(such a well-known action of the cat). I had a cocker spaniel which
indulged in this habit quite frequently, though not exclusively, and
yet his only intercourse with cats has been to chase them off the
premises.

[Sidenote: _Horses: belief in Spirits_]

Returning to the question of the faculty of _Imagination_ culminating
in an elemental superstition in lower animals, I will just refer to
one of many cases which I have witnessed in Horses. A horse, yoked to
a light trap containing two occupants besides myself, was being driven
down an avenue. Peeping over a hedgerow of an adjacent garden was a
large sun-flower, which the animal observed some little distance off.
Drawing near, he watched it so steadily that several pulls of the
reins failed to turn his head. Arriving opposite the inflorescence, he
stopped momentarily, and, not in a fearful but rather in an intensely
curious way, stared at it. A slight breeze caused the plant to sway
forward, whereupon the animal commenced to bolt. The curiosity here
aroused, which ended in the animal’s short halt to investigate this
strange object, seems to me to indicate some dim idea in the animal’s

[Sidenote: _Horses: genuine fright at natural enemies_]

mind of the presence of something uncanny. The animal evidently
regarded the sun-flower as a fetish. I am led to believe this inasmuch
as such action differs markedly from the immediate stampede which even
a well-trained, quiet, and fully-grown horse will make at its natural
and real enemy, a lion or a tiger, should even only the head of one of
these beasts appear afar off.

In regard to the faculty of Imagination occurring in wild beasts
confined behind prison bars, it is quite amazing to observe what may
or may not present itself as a fetish. I placed a reflex camera with
a _large telephoto lens_ close to a cage tenanted by a lion and a
lioness. The camera was slung from my shoulders. I had hardly commenced
to manipulate the instrument when the animals, becoming conscious of
the uncanny stare of a cyclopean monster (lens), instantly stampeded,
performing a series of catherine-wheel actions round their den. In an
adjacent cage was a panther. On seeing “cyclops,” this feline retreated
to a corner and commenced to growl and hiss, changing corners as I
moved diagonally in front of the bars. Reflex cameras now-a-days are
used so extensively in zoological gardens and menageries that the
animals, unless freshly imported, take little notice of them; however,
it was not my camera alone which brought such consternation to the king
of beasts and his queen; it was the _unusually large lens_ (“the eye of
cyclops”) no doubt very seldom seen in a Zoo――which shocked them. The
uncanny may be something very small. On one occasion I saw a puma very
much frightened at the sight of a white mouse sitting on the back of a
man’s hand placed close to the cage; a similar case has been recorded
of a tiger being terrified when a mouse, tied by a stick, was inserted
into its cage, the great beast, crouching in a corner, trembled and
roared in a paroxysm of fear. We are superstitious of tiny creatures of
human form (Fairies). Perhaps the tiger entertained a similar mental
state of a fairy quadruped!

Having related these instances, and before leaving the question
regarding the mental powers as exhibited in the animal kingdom, I will
remark that the tendency to imagine Spiritual Essences in natural
objects evidently has had its origin in creatures below the human
race, a point of much importance in pursuing one’s inquiries into the
origin and value of the ethical code in relation to primitive and more
advanced theologies, and into the real value which we must endeavour to
attach to so-called right and wrong. When Charles Darwin’s dog, which
he describes as a full-grown and very sensible animal, growled fiercely
and barked at the open parasol on the lawn which the wind slightly
moved, having no knowledge of the cause, a dim ethical aspect of the
matter took possession of the animal’s mind: was it right or wrong
to permit such a strange ‘living’ agent to cause this movement? In
his ignorance, the dog condemned this cause of action, but ethically
he was wrong in so doing, for he gained nothing, nay rather expended

[Sidenote: _Ethics of effects in the ignorance of the causes_]

unnecessary energy in barking at the effects of the wind; and, for
aught we know, this uncalled-for expression of his feelings may have
disturbed the balance of nature’s equilibrium among the creatures which
lay around him. I cite this example because we see on a far larger
scale so many parallels of boisterous expressions poured forth not
only by ignorant savages but by civilized, nevertheless superstitious,
people, in their endeavours to solve the problems of supposed Right and
Wrong, the effects of which they witness but of the causes of which
they know nothing, and about which they often frame the wildest and
most fantastic conjectures.




                              CHAPTER III

             EVIDENCES OF THE EVOLUTION OF THE MORAL SENSE


One might first be inclined to think that the upgrowth of the moral
sense would develop alongside the upgrowth of the mental powers――I
mean that the more complicated structurally the Brain became the
more elaborated and complex would become codes of ethics. But in
the long stem-history of Biological Genealogies we see in many of
the side-eddies which are carried from the main stream of evolution
evidences not only of arrested progress but of decided degeneration,

[Sidenote: _Arrest of progress in Evolution_]

and so the growth of morality does not go on in all cases _pari passu_
as the antiquity of the organic evolutionary factor is prolonged. In
Ants, Bees, and Wasps, for instance, one sees the ethical side of
life brought into far greater evidence than in many of the vertebrate
animals. The lines of conduct of these insects are directed along many
and diversified paths, but herein lies such an extensive study that I
must only make a passing reference to the subject. Lord Avebury has

[Sidenote: _Habits of Ants_]

said: “The Anthropoid apes no doubt approach nearer to man in bodily
structure than do any other animals; but when we consider the habits of
Ants, their social organization, their large communities, and elaborate
habitations; their roadways, their possession of domestic animals, and
even in some cases of slaves, it must be admitted that they have a
fair claim to rank next to man in the scale of intelligence.” Ants as
a class adopt an extraordinarily active and varied mode of existence,
and while their industry is not surpassed by that of Bees and Wasps,
which work all day and in warm weather often at night, trustworthy

[Sidenote: _Ants: times of relaxation from work_]

observers tell us that Ants indulge in amusements or “sportive
exercises,” and will raise “themselves on their hind-legs and caress
one another with their antennae, or engage in mock warfare, etc.” A
striking habit is that of licking one another to assist in cleaning. It
has also been stated that if Ants are only slightly hurt or are unwell
their companions will tend to their wants; though, when badly injured
or very ill, they are removed from the nest and left to die. Ants,
then, speaking generally, possess attachment and affection for their
fellows, and moreover there are individual differences between them
as between men. These insects are in deadly earnest when engaged in
warfare; their military tactics are wonderfully organized, their army
possessing soldiers, scouts, drivers, and so on. The natural history
of such delightfully interesting creatures deserves special attention,
and no doubt there is ample room still for observers to add to our
present store of knowledge regarding them. But space does not permit
me, moreover I hardly wish, to emphasize the mental powers of these
insects, which, though very apparent, may be, for the most part, if not
_in toto_, the results of inherited experiences and performed from the
beginning of their _imago_ existence almost in an automatic manner.
However, the few instances regarding their habits which I have set

[Sidenote: _Ants: moral sense_]

forth undoubtedly stamp these creatures as possessed of a remarkable
moral sense, but whether self-consciousness, as we know it, of their
sense of morality exists is quite another, and I fear an unanswerable,
question. Among certain vertebrate animals the moral faculty is well
developed in many directions, and the number of instances illustrating
mutual aid, succour in distress, and concerted action in battle, that
have been given, appear to broad-minded persons as examples of elevated
ethical standards of conduct. As in the case of the mental powers
displayed by lower animals, I shall here confine my remarks regarding
the faculty of the moral sense to those examples which have come under
my personal notice: such cases are not necessarily confined to animals
in a state of captivity.

[Sidenote: _Moral sense in Gulls and Terns_]

One cannot but admire the marked attention which a flock of Gulls or
Terns, exhibits when one of their number has been winged and lies
struggling on the water. The gunner, should he remain close by, is
ignored, and therefore other members of the flock within gun-shot
range run the risk of losing their lives. That the attentiveness of the
flock carries with it tenderness of feeling, an anxious curiosity, a

[Sidenote: _Attitude towards the wounded_]

wish to do something to get the fallen comrade either on the wing again
or out of sight of the danger zone, is shown by the way the members
fly gently to and fro, every now and again sweeping to the water as
though encouraging the cripple to try to rise, while others higher up
scream loudly for succour as they steady themselves on hovering wings.
Those of us whose eyes are trained to the different forms of flight in
the same species would unhesitatingly say that here in their movements
the birds were fully sympathizing with the unfortunate position of
their fallen companion. As we gaze for a little time on the scene of
action, we are led to ask the question: What more can these birds do?
Unable to convey the wounded to a place of safety, they linger on, and
by their presence appear to comfort their companion in distress. Such
an ethical aspect is in itself worthy of note, but the case is of more
than usual interest because, in their endeavours to bring happiness not

[Sidenote: _An example of Natures far-reaching code of ethics_]

only to their flock but to their wounded individual these sympathetic
birds unconsciously become the means of establishing a second and
more far-seeing ethical code. For Nature, whose inexorable law of the
Struggle for Existence formulates that we live for the general good
rather than for the general happiness, here shows the destiny of the
wounded bird as it is mercifully hurried to its doom, more quickly than
had its comrades abandoned it at once. For the screams of the Terns
have attracted a large predatory bird on the scene. Nature has thus
conferred a double benefit: she has put out of pain a poor fluttering
cripple, which, had it lived, could have been of no use to the
community, and in her economical manner has fed at the same time one of
her predatory creatures.

[Sidenote: _Birds as sentry-guards_]

The services which birds of a given order render to one another when
feeding in company are well known to all observant ornithologists. Let
me here refer to what I have seen in the case of Geese. One, two, or
three, or even more act as sentinels, taking up their position at the
edge of the flock. The sentinels eat but little, being constantly on
the look-out until relieved of their duties by some other members. Many
other cases of out-posted sentinels in flocks of ducks, curlews, and
rooks have come under my personal observation.

Often and often have I observed the still more remarkable and
praiseworthy methods of mutual aid afforded by _many birds_ of _many
diversified species_ gathered together in a vicinity (which may cover
a very large area) against the common enemy. Let the hawk appear in
swooping flight with destructive purpose (and very cognisant indeed
are the small birds of this movement); let the cat prowl and crouch
along the hedgerow or dare to come out on the open with the glare of
hunger in its flashing orbs, then the air becomes filled with the
loud, ringing, defiant battle-cries and alarm-notes of blackbirds,
thrushes, finches, buntings, warblers, and others, each and all of
which will boldly mount on wing to assail the feathered brigand, or
will fearlessly dash down, mob, and so harass the prowling feline that
cover is gladly sought without further delay.

Passing over the well-known moral sense of mutual aid rendered by
mammals when danger threatens, such as the stamping of the hind-foot
of the rabbit, and of the fore-foot of the sheep, I may conclude
this chapter by referring to some points illustrating the ethical
sense in fierce predatory animals. The Grey (or Hooded) Crow robs
eggs, steals nestlings, and attacks and pulls to pieces disabled
creatures often much larger than itself. And yet (as I have seen and
elsewhere described) a slender defenceless Redshank may forage amid

[Sidenote: _Ethical code of fierce predatory animals_]

the seaweed alongside his powerful companion without the least fear
of being attacked. It is true that the Crow confines his attacks to
nestlings and cripples: albeit, considering the Crow’s strength and
opportunities of attack, it is remarkable with what amicableness the
two species forage together to satisfy a common want. No doubt the
Crow’s power of refraining from attacking unwounded adult birds has
become a deeply rooted instinct, and that the Redshank knows by an
equally deeply rooted instinct that it is safe in the company of the
former; but this lesson we learn, namely that non-combatant creatures
are not living in a constant dread of those which periodically make
ferocious and determined attacks. This point I shall now endeavour
to bring out much more clearly in dealing with purely flesh-eating
animals. Many persons are in the habit of branding predatory animals
with such undeserved characters as, ‘_savage beasts_,’ ‘_treacherous
brutes_,’ and so on. This might lead one to think that multifarious
species of defenceless creatures live in a constant dread of being
seized every time a Hawk, a Cat, or some other animal of prey made its
appearance. Far from this being the case, there are several hours of
the day in which little birds combine into a flock, and enjoy mobbing
the Hawk as the latter soars, satiated with food, in graceful circles.
From its leisured flight I am satisfied that the Hawk enjoys the sport

[Sidenote: _Fraternity between the Prey-catcher and his prey_]

and audacity of his minor companions, any one of which he can so
easily pick up after a short pursuit when hunger calls his destroying
instincts into action. Falcons nest on the same cliffs with guillemots,
razorbills, puffins, kittiwakes, and other birds; and, while the former
kills three or four per day, the colonies of sea-birds appear to enjoy
a contented and happy existence, and attend assiduously to their duties
of incubation and rearing of the young. And, furthermore, one finds to
what an extent the moral sense can be brought out in predatory animals
bereft of their natural offspring. Cats are well known to suckle and

[Sidenote: _Conduct of predatory animals bereft of offspring_]

live in harmony with many species which go to form their natural prey,
and I am of the opinion that the case of cats rolling on the ground
and purring in the presence of birds is an indication of affection
and not treachery, as some observers think. Birds are often not the
least alarmed and seem to have some intuitive knowledge when a cat is
not hungry. I have seen them remain quite close to a cat which was in
a caressing mood, though naturally they will, and wisely, refuse to
be actually caressed by feline talons, lest mistakes might arise! My
Kestrel Hawk, with screams of anger flew at my pug-dog when the two
first met, but after a brief introduction they formed such a bond of
friendship that the hawk demonstrated its affection by jumping on its
companion’s back, or striking at her in play with its foot, or gently
pecking the crown of the head with its beak. Moreover, the hawk, when
liberated in the garden, always kept alongside the dog for protection
from the black cat.




                               CHAPTER IV

                    THE EVOLUTION OF HUMAN MORALITY


In treating of the subject of the moral sense as observed in lower
animals, in an outlined manner, I trust that I have made it sufficiently
clear that morality is not an exclusively human characteristic, nor is
there a breach in continuity in its evolution from lower animals to man.
We know that the faculties which are concerned with the evolution of the
moral sense are numerous. In the previous chapters I have dealt only
with a few of them. One of great importance I must again refer to
because of its bearing on the evolution of the conception of the

[Sidenote: _Faculty of Imagination, the tap-root of superstition_]

Supernatural. This faculty is _Imagination_. It is the tap-root of
superstition, and, as we have seen, arises also in the minds of the
lower animals. Superstition in turn is the tap-root of all the various
so-called theologies which have evolved without breach of continuity
from the time of primeval man down to the present day. Each system has
borrowed considerably from its predecessor, so that systems of
theologies are for the most part grafts of other systems of theologies.
A form of “morality” in its upward growth must needs have accompanied
these systems hand in hand, because they contained dictates regarding
the meaning of Right and Wrong given forth through human instrumentality
by supposed Supernatural Beings, often anthropomorphous, that is
possessed of definite human attributes.

The term “theology” may be assigned to these systems because they
discourse upon God. But, since they set out to define the undefinable
and know the unknowable, in dogmatic accents, and thereby to deal with
phenomena which not only transcend but are by their very nature at
variance with experience and violate natural law, it is to be expected
that those of us, who, by a process of unbiassed and rational reasoning
founded on historical evidences and scientific facts, have departed
from subscribing to the tenets of such systems, must seek after God,
that is to say found our theological philosophy along other lines of
thought. I mention this here because it is insisted by many that,
unless one adopts a systematized creed founded upon dogmas, religion
becomes cold and boneless. Far from this being the case, I hold that

[Sidenote: _The religious sense of the Biologist_]

the religious sense tends to heighten and acquire permanent vigour,
as the years of our life roll on, the deeper we study the biological
sciences, especially Anthropology. And naturally enough. For we are
brought into direct communion with God’s own works. _God and Nature are
to us the one Great Power._ It is the wonderful Force which appeals to
our religious sense, and as Naturalists we set to work to analyse this
and see for ourselves the vast benevolence――despite adversities――which
is contained therein. In our country rambles, in the laboratory,
anywhere and everywhere when we follow the truths of Nature, the
religious sense, if it be in us at all, must grow, ripen, and act as
our guide in conduct. Ecclesiasticism――the bulwark of supernatural
theology――may dictate her code of morals, but morality can exist apart
from Ecclesiasticism. Morality apart from natural theology leaves us
nowhere; indeed, morality joins hands and becomes an integral part of
natural theology. By relinquishing dogmatic creeds with their systems
of external authority, of rewards, of punishments, etc., which are
to many of us an incubus, _we have_ (in our endeavours to follow out
the best ethical code of life) _the study of God presented to us in a
beautiful, pure and simple form_. It may be said that this procedure
reduces our creed to mere Agnosticism; no doubt, though I cannot call
this a reduction but rather an expansion of religious thought. For

[Sidenote: _The Agnostic attitude_]

Agnosticism, an attitude rather than a creed, is nevertheless other
than a _non est_. We can define the agnostic position in Huxley’s
words: “that we know nothing that may be beyond phenomena ... that a
man shall not say he knows or believes that which he has no scientific
grounds for professing to know or believe”; concerning which Samuel
Laing says: “that is not a positive or an aggressive creed, and is
reconcilable with any form of moral, intellectual, or religious belief
which is not dogmatic――i.e. which does not attempt to impose on us some
hard and fast theory of the Universe, based on attempts to define the
undefinable and explain the unknowable.”

It seems an incalculable gain to have reached this stage of thought,
and to have set aside the idea of an anthropomorphic God, in whom
some imperfections must be manifest if we, human creatures, fettered
by finite thought, would fain place attributes upon the Infinite.
Is it not the essence of true religion and morality to think and
reflect upon God, or the Good in the purely abstract sense, while we
endeavour to act as Social and Ethical Beings; to make the best of
adverse circumstances, and to banish from our minds that ingrained
superstition――_Fear of the Supernatural_?

[Sidenote: _Evolution of Agnostic Theology_]

But as many of us have not reached this stage and still adhere to the
dictates of anthropomorphic deities, and inasmuch as natural theology
has in itself evolved from supernatural theology, there can be no real
antithesis between one and the other, no more than there is between
the protoplasm and essence of life in the jelly-fish and in that of
man. The fact that quarrels arise, and highly-strung religious cults
split up into sects, reminds us of the splitting up of many social
animals of a given species into tribes, which also wage war. There
seems to exist even among the most tolerant of sectarianists a sort of

[Sidenote: _Struggle for the Existence of Immortality_]

struggle for the existence of Immortality, as there is a struggle for
earthly existence. Let us, therefore, as Naturalists, in other than a
contentious spirit, take a glance at the upgrowth of superstition, and
the morality it has carried with it from the dim past to the present.
Let us, indeed, regard the evolution of theology as an inherent
instinct or inherited experience in the Natural History of Man, which
will likely go on for an immensely long era yet to come. By such a
process of study I think we shall be enabled to take the wisest and
most dispassionate view regarding the morality associated with present
day systems of religions based upon the dictates of external authority.

To return to consider the faculty of Imagination. I have made reference
to this in the case of the Dog, and perhaps may be pardoned if I
briefly do so again, as at this juncture such a reference will help
us to lead up to what directly follows regarding the origin of the
conception of the Supernatural. In his _Modern Science and Modern
Thought_ Samuel Laing remarks: “Later in life, and in more serious
matters, the dog has certainly the germs of higher intelligence, and
does a number of things which require a certain exercise of reasoning
power. He has a good memory, and imagination enough to be excited

[Sidenote: _Dogs and Dreams_]

at the prospects of a walk where there is a chance of finding a rat
or a rabbit, and to dream of chasing imaginary rabbits when he is
lying curled up upon the hearthrug.... Every good ghost-story begins
by describing how the dogs howled and cringed at their master’s
feet when the first shadow of supernatural presence was cast on the
haunted castle.” Now, while the imaginative faculty of dogs may not be
sufficiently developed to reflect on past dreams, or even to remember
them at all (though we have no reason to prove the contrary), still,
assuming such, it is very unlikely that primeval man, so much higher
and removed zoologically speaking by so many gaps from the dog, did
not reconsider these visions during the waking state. _Herbert Spencer
insists that dreams probably led to the belief in, in fact were, the_

[Sidenote: _Dreams the fount of Dualistic existence_]

_origin of dualistic ideas._ The dream is the spirit or shadowy self
which in sleep leaves the body, walks, talks, and appears in many and
varied scenes, and returns to the body as it awakes. In its last
sleep of death this spirit becomes a ghost which haunts its former
habitations, generally it is supposed with evil purposes, and to
prevent it doing mischief it has to be propitiated. Thus became evolved
the sacrifices and offerings, and the burial of food and implements
with the corpse to induce the ghost to keep quietly in the grave, and
so on. It would seem that the dualistic idea appeared at a very remote
age in the history of man, and it is wonderful with what tenacity,
extending as it does over periods of hundreds of thousands of years

[Sidenote: _The Fearful in the Supernatural_]

right down to the present day, the belief in ghosts survives. Its
universality in days gone by would tend to render this mental state
the more transmissible. Here then we see the first indications of the
_Fearful_ in the Supernatural. And this would become more intensified
as the belief in a future state began to present itself before the mind
of the savage. For, as communities became larger and more organized,
the strong man of the tribe would continue to force his followers to
greater submission, and, when deified at death, this submission would
still be paid him lest he should take vengeance unexpectedly. Next
we behold primitive man reflecting on the awe-inspiring destructive
forces of Nature. Peals of thunder, flashes of lightning, earthquakes,
volcanoes, prairie and forest fires, storms and floods, were evidences
of the wrath of the Supernatural. The unseen agencies were God-Devils:
good when they behaved themselves and brought happiness; bad when they
manifested fury and caused destruction. At this stage man reflected
but little on a future state; during his bodily existence he was in
heaven when happy; in hell when miserable. As the imagination ripened
the God-Devil was reflected upon to a greater extent and the evidence
of his existence portrayed itself in many tangible objects, animate
and inanimate; at the same time we see a tendency to split off the
two deified components, the God usually entering the more attractive
and harmless, the Devil the more obnoxious and subtle creatures. But

[Sidenote: _Evolution of God and Devil from common ancestor_]

for ages this worship of Animism remained in a state of chaos; gods
becoming devils and _vice versa_, and from natural creatures the
conception of mythical monsters sprang up, the imaginative faculty
becoming so fertile that the manipulative power of modelling these as
idols in wood and stone developed to an extraordinary degree. A step in
advance of Animism brings us on to Totemism, in which form of worship
animals could think and speak and were, indeed, men in a different

[Sidenote: _Totemism and its survivals_]

form. They were looked up to and regarded as heads of tribes and
families, and finally as ancestors. Some tribes of Red Indians believe
that they have descended from the Elk, others from the Bear, others
from the Fox, others from the Beaver, and so on from other animals. In
his _Human Origins_ Samuel Laing points out that the “animal worship
of Egypt has been probably a survival of the old faiths in totems,
differing among different clans, which were so firmly rooted in the
popular traditions, that the priests had to accommodate their religious
conceptions to it, as the Christian Fathers did with so many pagan
superstitions. The division of the twelve tribes of Israel seems also
to have been originally totemic, judging from the old saga in which

[Sidenote: _Modern crests and totemism_]

Jacob gives them his blessing, identifying Judah with a lion, Dan
with an adder, and so on. And, even at the present day, the crest of
the Duke of Sutherland carries us back to the time when the wild-cat
was the badge, and very probably some great and fierce wild cat the
ancestor, in popular belief, of the fighting clan Chattan.”

And now we see Man――his mind still in the cradle of his infancy――gazing
upward and beholding in the starry heavens many strange and weird forms
in constellations and other stellar groups: out of these sprang the

[Sidenote: _Astronomical myths_]

conception of personified astronomical myths. This is an important era
in the imaginative faculty of Man, seeing that so many of the legends,
which form the basis of dogmatic creeds of civilized nations within
historic times (but dating as far back as the time of the ancient
Egyptians, and as recently as current Christianity) are accepted with
purblind faith and regarded as literally and absolutely true facts.
However, before arriving at the period of written history, let us ask
ourselves what was the code of human morals in the crudely savage and

[Sidenote: _Moral Sense in Pre-historic man_]

superstitious ages. Was Man then possessed of moral sense? Assuredly
so. For as we have seen in the lower animals that many moral faculties
were manifest, so also have these been transmitted by evolution to Man
in whom they have become more elaborated. And before we ask how the
moral sense arose, we wish to know if Man, at the dawn of existence,
differed much in moral character from his more humble compatriots. The
answer seems plain enough. For, seeing that his imaginative faculty was
more fertile and that he had the power of reflecting on the visions
of night and upon effects produced by unseen agencies, and that these
haunted him, he became the victim of _fear_ and _timidity_. Handicapped
by such a mental state, he directed his conduct to concerted action,
and the gathering of his clans gave strength and support in the
struggle for life. As he possessed already then a fundamental or
instinctive moral sense comparable to that possessed by a dog, only
accentuated by a greater development of his imaginative faculty, we, at
this juncture naturally ask: What is then the derivative of that moral
sense common to all Nature’s creatures?

I have shewn in previous pages that a fundamental moral sense is not
wanting even in solitary predatory animals, the outcome of which is
that _a happy existence can for the most part be permitted to living
creatures in general_. And when we consider that the non-predatory

[Sidenote: _Nature’s ways tend not to Cruelty_]

animals are usually taken by surprise by those, who in the struggle
of existence must needs make use of them for food, _a pessimistic_ or
_cruel view of Nature’s ways appears illogical_.

Sympathy is the foundation stone on which the moral sense has been
erected, and the fount of sympathy would seem to have arisen with
the commencement of conjugal ties and filial affections. The young,
on being tended to by their parents, would naturally, i.e. by a
process of natural selection, derive pleasure from the benefits thus
conferred on them in the society of their parents, as would one parent

[Sidenote: _Dawn of the Social Instinct_]

in the society of its mate. Thus the social instinct would spring
into existence, and in cases of several families benefited by close
association, not only one but many generations might become sociable
and keep together. Tribal communities would thus be formed, in which
the social instinct would become strongly rooted. And here I believe
I am right in saying that, if it were possible to make a statistical
survey of the whole animal kingdom, the majority of creatures would
be found living in societies, though these varied from small groups
to immense colonies. And, without elaborating further on the subject
of sociability which would take us too far afield in the present
treatise, we can readily see that sympathy among the members of
the flock would of necessity follow. If sympathy even in its most
restricted and elemental form, did not arise, then in the struggle
for existence the factors which conserve or make for the general
good of the community would cease to act and finally disappear _in
toto_. And sympathy when evolved would manifest its moral code in

[Sidenote: _Filial affection the tap-root of the social instinct_]

many actions. And now, before considering the moral sense of Man as
he appears at this stage, i.e. a tribal sociable animal, I may point
out that while I hold to the idea that filial affection appears to
be the tap-root of the social instinct, it may happen that natural
selection has ordained in a few cases for the good of their special
community that this filial affection should be of short duration,
and indeed in still more special cases be replaced by animosity. As
illustrating these points I may mention birds of prey which in the
wild state drive away their offspring from their hunting-grounds
at a tender age, while working-bees kill their brother-drones, and

[Sidenote: _The ethics of the energetic members in Insect communities
and fate of the Indolent_]

queen-bees their daughter-queens. Even here in the case of the bees it
is quite obvious that the destruction of the drones by the workers is
far from being an act devoid of moral sense. For, if the experiment
of putting a drone and a working-bee in a roomy glass box (or under
a tumbler as I have often done), be tried, it will be seen that the
working-bee (provided with her fatal weapon of offence, the sting)
does not at once set herself out to sting the drone to death. On the
contrary, both bees become occupied in trying to escape, and, unless
numbers are imprisoned together, the stinging-bees will not hurt the
drones; but, when the room becomes suffocatingly small, then not only
are the drones attacked but the workers attack each other. But at the
hive things are different. The sole office of the drone is that of
fertilizing the queen; before and after this is accomplished he leads
an indolent life, being pushed out of the way by active energetic
creatures and devoured in great numbers by spiders and other predatory
arthropods. Thus, when not engaged in fertilizing the queen, should he
remain close by the hive and thereby interrupt the working community
he, regarded as a useless ‘loafer,’ is naturally disposed of in the
best way possible, viz. by extinction. Indeed, from the excellence of
the results obtained by the government here adopted, in which only
those who work are permitted to survive, it is suggestive that we
might adopt less lenient measures than we are wont to do when human
‘loafers’ come about, and, determined not to work, persist in acting as
obstructionists to the energetic community.

But now let us inquire into the moral character of man assuming him
to have become a sociable animal. Sympathy in its various aspects
should guide him in his line of conduct, yet how can we recognize

[Sidenote: _Analysis of atrocious deeds of savages_]

this important moral sense with the revolting cruelties which the
records of his rude and barbarous age darken? Nevertheless, we are
often too hasty in condemning the cannibals, the scalp-hunters, or the
Dyak head-hunters, the last-mentioned being not satisfied unless they
preserve and dry their gruesome trophies. Many other revolting savage
customs might be cited, enough to make us wonder if the moral sense
of the social savage is even on a level with that of the dog. However,
we must not lose sight of the fact that the moral code is instinctive
only to the members of a given tribe, so that such sociable actions
as concerted movement in attack, mutual aid in defence, and so on,
do not extend to all the individuals even of a small insular nation.
Consequently, while there is a hopeless clash of morality when two or
more tribes collide, still it is manifest that _human savagery must
be intermittent, very irregular_, and――_most important of all――quite
unexpected_, so that here also except when actually engaged in the
affray, Man in his most abject state did not constantly contemplate on
and live in dread of hostile conditions. Even among the best organized
communities of the lower animals tribal wars break out, as inevitably
as thunder-storms and hurricanes burst upon our planet. In such feuds
the weaker members perish, and the wounded are often set upon, torn to
pieces, and devoured by their adversaries. Similarly in the case of
Man; nor can we do justice to his gradual evolution, by natural means,

[Sidenote: _Cannibalism and religious rites_]

and at the same time look upon cannibalism, scalping, or head-hunting
as indiscriminate butcheries, _but rather as occasional disasters which
necessarily follow tribal feuds_. Indeed, cannibalism has to a large
extent been associated with religious rites, _the victim often laying
down his life voluntarily for motives conceived as highly advantageous
to the tribe_; sometimes he was deified after death, and the eating
of the slain god finds its parallel, as a rite in several religious
systems. These acts of atonement by the shedding of human blood, which
have chronicled the past ages of Man’s history, were, with the active
growth of his Imagination in which Fear became the ever dominant
factor, a necessary phase in his evolution toward that higher state
known as civilization, in which we behold an expansion and elevation of
his moral code.

[Sidenote: _Man in historic times_]

I need only make a passing reference to Man as he appears in historic
times. The ancient civilizations point to great antiquity, and, judging
from their elaborated systems of religions and morals, they must have
taken an immensity of time to reach the era of civilization. These
great Empires, Egypt, Babylon, Rome, Greece, and others, have grown
up, flourished, sunk, and died, leaving as a legacy to us permanent
written records of their peoples and their moral code. The cults of
the Orientals, speaking in a very general way, were evolved to a large
extent out of solar myths, based on the daily rising and setting of the
sun, its yearly course through the seasons, and the signs of the zodiac.

[Sidenote: _Solar mythology and its present-day survivals_]

It is not possible here to enter into a study of comparative religions
of civilised peoples, but it may be remarked that many legends and
dogmas of such vital importance in the eyes of sectarian religionists,
such as _the Creation and Fall of Man_, _Universal Deluge_, _the
Resurrection of the Body_, _the Virgin Birth of an Incarnate Deity in
human form_, and several others, appear to have had their conception of
origin in Astronomical and mainly in Solar Mythology. And now, passing
through the Dark Ages which succeeded the fall of the latest great
Empire, namely Rome, and bearing in mind that the pendulum had to swing
back as an era of savage bigotry was entered upon, we at length arrive
at the present age. Here, then, let us conclude by taking a glance
at the moral codes which are associated with Man in that stage of
evolution in which he now presents himself to us.

[Sidenote: _Man of present-day civilizations_]

We must bear in mind that throughout I have insisted on the moral
sense and the various beliefs which have sprung out of its imaginative
faculty as being _forces of evolution_, and that all these various
beliefs, when formulated into dogmas, can be linked together and
traced back to their common ancestor――_Crude Superstition_. Hence it
seems obvious that the Naturalist, from his point of view, would

[Sidenote: _The Superstitious and the Non-superstitious Man_]

conveniently classify all civilized communities, according to the
evolution of their moral sense, into two great Orders, namely: the
Superstitious, and the Non-superstitious. There may be some weak
connecting links between the two, but these cannot break down our
classification. Furthermore, it matters not whether we are considering
Western or Eastern civilizations, or even if we were to include
the Ancient civilizations. What we are considering is the morality
of that class of Man which has evolved into the highest degree of
intellectuality, and into the civilized sphere into which we think he
has arrived, though at the same time it remains hard to comprehend what
civilization really is and how it can be defined.

[Sidenote: _First principles of the Superstitious Man_]

To return to our classification: and firstly with regard to the
Superstitious Order. By far the greater number of persons in the
world are here included. The existence of Super-nature inhabited by
Super-Natural Beings, which Beings can act at variance with or even
rupture the fixed Laws of Nature is the first principle or essence
of their Imaginative Faculty. These Beings may exist plurally,
pseudo-plurally (e.g. the Deities of the Christian Trinity), or more
rarely only in the singular number (Unitarianism). The intensity of
the Imaginative Faculty allows of a conception of Anthropomorphism,
that is to say, of Beings possessed of humanly-conceived form and
attributes. Fearful in their superstitious conceptions the people of

[Sidenote: _Anthropomorphism and the standardization of an ethical
code_]

the superstitious order seek to standardize the conception of Right
and Wrong action, and this conception, of purely human origin, is
attributed by the leaders of the particular superstition to come from
the Super-Natural Being, _whom they mould in their own image_. But it
is the leaders or expounders of the cult who dictate authority, and,
acting as deputies to the Super-natural, try to over-stimulate the
Faculty of Imagination, until the mind becomes warped, and _the power
of faith, rather than the power of reasoning, takes the position of
paramount importance in morals_. But faith, unless strongly backed and
controlled by reason, is a shifting sand on which to erect a code of
morals. For, as the community of the cult enlarges, the struggle to
live by the standard of morality set up becomes increasingly difficult,
and what inevitably follows is that the faithful become imposed upon by
being asked to believe in further elaborations of the Super-natural’s
ordinances. This, which corresponds to the systematizing of creeds and
the expounding of certain mystical philosophies, can have only a tenure
of existence. For, even assuming the Superstition to be an increasingly
attractive and fashionable one, it will, as its community increases,
soon elaborate to such an extent that, at last unable to maintain its
standard of morality, it becomes split up into sections, which tend
to subdivide at a subsequent period. The conception of the Imagery
and its elaborations lose unity, and the feelings of the members
of the divided cults, now at variance, become heated, and later on

[Sidenote: _Evolution of Sectarianism in civilized superstitious cults_]

sufficiently frenzied to induce sectarian bitterness. These manifestos
of superstition go by the name of “religion,” but, when sectarianism
becomes rife and modern tribal wars, so to speak, are waged, it is
clear that true religious thought becomes dwarfed, and may disappear:
fortunately, however, only for a time, for evolution ever tends to
carry the moral sense upward. Thus, by a swing of the pendulum, a new
and simpler superstition, founded on less extravagant imagination
than its predecessor, springs out of the tail of one of the sectarian
offshoots, and may supplant it. The cycle is repeated and so the drama

[Sidenote: _Endurance of the Superstitious order_]

of the Superstitious Order of Man endures. His morals more or less
coincide with his beliefs. The simpler his faith, the simpler his code,
but at its best the moral sense, based upon superstition, is, from the
essence of its foundation, bound to be permeated with falsities and
absurdities. Fortunately, however, there is a moral sense implanted in
all of us, which has gradually evolved and has by a process of Natural
Selection made us heirs of those virtues which we display instinctively
for the good of the community. These we all possess, though in varying
degrees, but in the Superstitious man many of them become hampered from
developing to their full extent. For, if certain faculties of the moral
sense run riot and largely monopolize action of thought――and this is
what happens in the case of highly imaginative people――the moral sense
becomes lop-sided, and morality is viewed as through smoked glasses.

We may now ask Who is the Non-superstitious Man, and of what moral code
is he possessed? At present he is doubtless greatly in the minority,
but with the advance of scientific thought he appears to be increasing
in numbers daily. He hails from two sources. In either case he is

[Sidenote: _The Non-superstitious order of Man_]

fortified by the possession of a wholesome degree of scepticism and
of critical faculty, which enable him to inquire unbiassedly into the
origin of phenomena, and to accept or reject statements according
as his own reasoning faculty alone guides him. He fails to see
_‘Super-Nature’ outside Nature as known to him, and he stands aloof
from the dictates of external authority when it_ _asserts without
evidence_. It is obvious that one of the sources from whence he springs
is from a Superstitious Cult, out of which he emerges as a dissenter,
and to which it is exceedingly rare to find him returning. The other
source finds its example in the man whose parents already have belonged
to the Non-superstitious Order and who adopts the same. The position
of the Non-superstitious man is simple to follow. He neither asserts
nor denies questions concerning phenomena which lie outside the
range of experience; but, taking his moral stand altogether on the

[Sidenote: _Rules of Morality apart from conceptions of the
Supernatural_]

firm platform of evolutionary evidence, he recognizes that there are
fundamental rules of Morality apart from any Imaginative conceptions
of the Super-natural. He knows such fundamental rules are the outcome
of heredity and environment, and that with each successive generation
they become more and more so instinctively. Unfettered mentally by an
artificial code of morals of the sectarian religionist, his moral sense
naturally comes to the front, and he knows his motto to be:

    “And because right is right, to follow right
     Were wisdom in the scorn of consequence.”


                                 FINIS




 Transcriber’s Notes:

 ――Text in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_).

 ――Punctuation and spelling inaccuracies were silently corrected.

 ――Archaic and variable spelling has been preserved.

 ――Variations in hyphenation and compound words have been preserved.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PASSING OF THE PHANTOMS ***